Hi, I'm Noah Gantz and
we're starting session 3 of week 4
of our operations analytics course.
In session 1 of this week,
we introduced decision trees to analyze
decisions to be made under uncertainty.
Then, in session 2, we used simulation
to evaluate event nodes within a tree
that had a complex set of outcomes.
In this session,
we'll address another complexity.
Suppose there are many alternative
choices available at a decision node.
For example,
suppose our retailer IDEA must decide how
many units of the Krusbar tent to order.
Then there's a useful alternative to
drawing out the many branches that can
follow from a decision.
We can sometimes use simulation together
with optimization to analyze this many
decisions.
In this session, we'll build on
this simulation model we built for
IDEA in session 2.
And, we'll use the solver that's
again introduced in week 2,
to optimize among the large set
of choices that IDEA can make.
In session 3, we're going to use
optimization together with simulation
to help IDEA choose order quantities.
To get started let's remember what the
demand model is for IDEA's Krusbar tent.
There's a 50/50 chance that
demand will be strong or weak.
If demand is weak, it'll be uniformly
distributed between 2,000 and 8,000 units.
If demand is strong, it will be
uniformly distributed between 6,000 and
14,000 units.
In either case, we're going to
call the random variable for
demand D, and
we'll simulate that in Excel.
Other elements of IDEA's problem have
remained the same from the beginning.
The price per tent is 150 Euros.
The order quantity, fixed charge,
and unit cost varies by supplier.
For supplier S, IDEA orders 5,000 units.
It's got a fixed charge of 0.
And the unit cost is 120 euros per tent.
For supplier P, IDEA orders 10,000 units.
It has a fixed charge of 50,000 euros and
the unit cost is 100 euros per tent.
But suppose IDEA could
choose the order quantity.
In the original problem, IDEA had to
use 100% of the supplier's capacity,
all 5,000 units from supplier S and
all 10,000 units from supplier P.
Suppose that supplier P now offers
IDEA the following contract.
The upfront charge would
increase from €50,000-€100,000.
IDEA would need to place the first
order of at least 4000 units.
IDEA would then place a second order which
could very anywhere from 0 to 6,000 units.
IDEA would place that second order
in response to market conditions.
The timing of the second order would be
shortly after the start of the summer
selling season.
At that point,
IDEA would know with certainty if
the market were weak of strong.
We're gonna call the total
quantity IDEA orders Q, and
that total quantity will vary somewhere
between 4,000 and 10,000 units.
That's the 4,000 unit minimum from the
first order plus anywhere from 0 to 6,000
units for the second order.
If IDEA chooses supplier P and
the market is weak, we can write out
all of the equations that we need.
IDEA pays a fixed cost
of 100,000 Euros now.
If IDEA decides on a total order quantity
of Q, that's somewhere between 4,000 and
10,000 units, then the order cost
would be 100 Euros per unit times Q.
Demand D is now uniformly distributed
between 2,000 and 8,000 units.
And IDEA earns 150 euros of revenue for
each unit sold.
If D, the demand, is less than Q,
the order quantity,
then the revenue would be 150 euros
times D, that's the number sold.
If D, demand, is greater than Q,
the order quantity, then the revenue
would be 150 euros times Q.
Because at that point,
Q would be the number of units sold.
We can put those two equations together,
and write the total revenue as 150 euros,
times the total number sold,
or the minimum of D and Q.
We can now write IDEA's profit function.
There's the 100,000 euro up front cost,
the 100 Euro times
Q order cost, and
the 150 Euro times the sales revenue.
Notice that this is almost identical to
the profit formula from the last session.
But last time, the fixed cost was
50,000 rather than 100,000 Euros.
And last time we fixed Q at 10,000 units.
Here we're going to let Q
be a decision variable.
Okay, let's look at the Excel spreadsheet.
This Excel spreadsheets called
IDEA Optimazation.xlsx and
you can download it
from the Coursera site.
The first sheet is a ten
sample version of the problem
when IDEA of contracts with supplier P,
and demand is weak.
If you look in cell B3,
you can see the order quantity of 10,000.
Because that's going to be a decision
variable, I've highlighted it in red.
Next we have a fixed cost of 100,000,
rather than the 50,000 we had before.
We've got the unit price of 150 Euros, and
a unit cost for supplier P of 100 Euros.
The lower rows in column B, show 10
samples of demand when the market is weak,
and you should see that they're
familiar from last time.
The rest of the spreadsheet
is calculated just as before.
And you can see that when
IDEA orders from supply P,
the order size is 10,000 units and
the market is weak,
the average profits are really
a loss of nearly 500,000 euros.
I've highlighted
the average profit in blue
because that's going to be
our objective function.
Now what we'd like to do is we'd like to
optimize by choosing
a better order quantity.
And to do that we're going to
use the solver optimization tool
that Sergei introduced to you in week 2.
Remember that to access the Solver
we go up to the Data tab.
And then the Solver menu item.
The dialog box is quite small, and
as before don't worry if you
can't see the numbers clearly,
just hang on a moment and I'll show
you a slightly larger version of it.
But let's go ahead and fill it in.
We wanna set our objective
to be average profit,
and we wanna make sure
that Solver maximizes it.
Our decision variable is Q,
the order quantity.
And we just have two constraints.
The first constraint is that we want
to make sure that the order quantity is
greater than or equal to,
the 4000 unit minimum.
The second constraint is that the order
quantity should be less than or
equal to, the 10,000 unit maximum.
I know that Sergei has told you,
if you can, you'd wanna use the simplex
method to make it a linear model.
Unfortunately this is not a linear model
and I'll describe in a little more detail
later why that is and
what we can do about it.
Before I move on though,
I wanna show you just a slightly
bigger version of the dialogue box.
We set the objective to be cell F21,
that was the average profit.
We wanna maximize the average profit.
Our decision variable was cell B3,
that was the order quantity.
And we had two constraints, that the order
quantity, B3, should be less than or
equal to 10,000 units and the order
quantity B3, should be greater than or
equal to 4,000 units.
Again, we're gonna stick
with GRG nonlinear,
because unfortunately this
optimization problem is nonlinear.
And I'll talk about
that again in a moment.
Here we are, back at the spreadsheet.
I'm going to access
the Solver dialog box now.
And I'm actually gonna solve the problem.
And here's the optimal solution.
The optimal solution for supplier P,
when the market is weak and
we have these ten demand samples,
is to order the bare minimum, 4,000 units.
In this case, IDEA makes
an average profit of 18,150 euros.
Now remember that the average profit for
these ten samples might not
be the average profit for
a different set of ten samples, and I
wanna talk about that as well in a moment.
Before I move on, I wanna point out
that the problem's not linear, but
we could still solve it.
And you can see in the Solver dialogue
box on the right, we use GRG Nonlinear.
The objective,
remember, is to maximize the average
profits across all the samples.
And the profit within each
sample depends on revenue
that includes that min function.
And the min function is not
linear in a not very nice way.
But we are lucky that
Excel's solver can solve it,
although it might not always work.
And if you're interested, there's an
optional advanced session where I'll show
you how to clean up the formulation, and
eliminate the problem with non-linearity.
I wanna repeat that it's
an optional session, and
we won't be testing you on it.
Okay, let's go back to
the optimal solution.
And here's a screenshot
with the ten samples.
Remember, for supplier P in a weak market,
the optimal solution here
is to order 4,000 units.
And the average profit is 18,150 Euros.
Of course, that optimal solution is only
optimal for that set of ten samples.
All right?
If we were to run the same optimization
on a different set of ten samples,
then we might get a different optimal Q.
Why?
Well, as Sergei showed you in Week 3,
a set of 10 samples is quite small.
We really need more samples for
more precise,
stable estimates from the simulation.
The same principle holds true for
the optimal solution.
With 1,000 samples, the optimal Q's would
not tend to change much across samples.
The spreadsheet's optimal solution
of course even with 1,000
samples is just an estimate optimal Q.
To find the truly optimal
Q using simulation,
we need to include an infinite
number of samples.
Here's the optimal solution for
1,000 samples, when IDEA contract
with supplier P in a weak market.
This screenshot is from Excel.
And I've just put it into PowerPoint.
You'll see that the optimal order
quantity is about 4,138 units.
That's a little more than the 4,000
units that we saw when there were only
ten samples.
And the objective function value,
the average profit, is 51,646 Euros.
We can also run the same simulation for
supplier P in a strong market.
You can see in the upper left that
the optimal order quantity is
about 8,850 units.
And the average profit, the objective
function value in the lower right,
is about 268,862 Euros.
The only difference between
this spreadsheet and
the other is in column B where we've
got a new set of demand samples.
Remember in a strong market,
the uniform distribution stretches
from 6,000 to 14,000 units.
Now that we've simulated a weak market and
a strong market, and
run an optimization for each, we have two
estimates of the expected profits for
IDEA, and we can fill out the rest
of IDEA's decisions tree.
Here's the decision tree,
let me remind you,
on the left is the contracting decision.
An IDEA has three choices, it can
contract with no one, and earn no Euros.
It could contract with supplier S,
and if the market were weak,
its estimate of the expected
profit would be 42,405 Euros.
If the market were strong,
its estimate of the expected
profit would be 150,000 Euros.
Finally, IDEA could decide
to contract with supplier P.
With the new contract we've run
the optimization with the simulation, and
found estimates for the expected
profits for a weak and a strong market.
For the weak market, it's 51,646 Euros.
And for the strong market,
it's 268,862 Euros.
We've got the whole decision tree,
and we can evaluate
the expected value maximizing
decision just as we normally would.
We'll start out with the event nodes and
calculate the expected values.
For supplier S it remains just as we
had before because nothing's changed.
The expected value or
our estimate of the expected value for
supplier S is 96,202 Euros.
With the new contract for supplier P
our estimate of the expected value
is 160,254 Euros.
We're going to now replace the event
nodes with those expected values.
The last step of evaluating
the decision tree
is to find the decision that
maximizes the expected value.
And here you can see the optimal
decision is to go with supplier P,
with an estimated expected
value of 160,254 Euros.
So we'll eliminate the other two choices.
What's happened?
The ability of IDEA to
change order quantities in
response to market conditions has
actually added value for supplier P.
IDEA's expected profit from contracting
with P has increased enormously,
from about 6,500 Euros with
a fixed order quantity of 10,000,
to around 160,000 Euros now.
So, the new contract with supplier P is
now favored over IDEA's other options.
So, that's it for session 3 of week 4.
How did Idea's problem change
from last session to this one?
As before, we simulated the outcomes for
the weak and strong markets.
The demand model had a 50/50 chance
that the market would be weak or strong.
For each case, we then simulated
uniformly distributed demand.
This time, however, the structure of
the decision problem became more complex.
First, IDEA needed to decide on
a supplier, either S or P, or no one.
For supplier P,
I could then decide on an order quantity.
Rather than running a separate
simulation for each possible Q,
and we could have run a separate
simulation for Q equals 4000,
Q equals 4001, Q equals 4002,
we used a common set of simulated
demands for all the possible Q's.
And we then optimized to find
an "approximately optimal" Q.
In fact, we essentially solved Senthil's
newsvendor problem from Week 1.
And in next session,
we'll go back to see how we do it.
In this session,
we extended our model of decision making
to include more complex decisions.
We simulated a single set of demands and
calculated average profit as a function
of them, and of IDEA's order quantity Q.
By optimizing the spreadsheet,
we estimated the Q that would
maximize IDEA's expected profits.
So now we've seen how we can use three
analytics tools together to evaluate
potentially complex decisions to be
made under uncertainty, decision trees,
simulation and optimization.
Not only that, we also know how to crack
the news vendor problem that Senhtil
introduced in week one of the course.
In session 4, we'll go back to
the news vendor to see how it's done.